The Project Gutenberg EBook of Federal Bureau of Investigation FOIA
Documents - Unidentified Flying Objects, by United States Federal Bureau of Investigation

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Federal Bureau of Investigation FOIA Documents - Unidentified Flying Objects

Author: United States Federal Bureau of Investigation

Release Date: June 5, 2008 [EBook #25706]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOIA DOCUMENTS - UFOS ***




Produced by Robin Monks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: The interchanging use of "disc" and "disk" has been
retained. Words that were censored are indicated by underscores.
Handwritten comments and various stamps used on the documents are noted
at the end of each document.




UFO

SECTION 1




FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
COMMUNICATIONS SECTION

AUG 11 1947

TELETYPE

FBI PORTLAND      8-11-47      1-17 PM PST      KAM

DIRECTOR      U R G E N T


FLYING DISCS. SECURITY MATTER DASH X. ONE ____ FORMER NAVY PILOT AND
PRESENTLY ____ MYRTLE CREEK, ____ OREGON, REPORTS SEEING A MYSTERIOUS
OBJECT ON TWO OCCASIONS THE EVENING OF AUGUST SIXTH WHILE FLYING AT
ABOUT FIVE THOUSAND FEET ABOVE MYRTLE CREEK. HATFIELD TO BE
INTERVIEWED.

BOBBITT

END

5-18 PM OK FBI WASH DC GAR


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              30 OCT 1947

              EX-60]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : DIRECTOR, FBI                          DATE: August 12, 1947

FROM   : SAC, MILWAUKEE

SUBJECT: FLYING DISCS
         SABOTAGE


Reference is made to Bureau Bulletin No. 42, Series 1947, dated July
30, 1947, Section (B), which advises that all reports concerning flying
discs should be investigated by field offices.

Prior to the receipt of these instructions, two instances were called
to the attention of this office concerning flying discs. One report was
received July 7, 1947, the details of which are set forth in Milwaukee
letter to the Bureau dated July 8, 1947, entitled, "Flying Discs or
Saucers, Miscellaneous, Telephone Call from Mr. Fletcher at the Bureau
at 8:30 a.m., 7-7-47." No investigation was conducted concerning this
report.

The second report was received by this office at 1:20 p.m. July 11,
1947, from ____ who is in charge of the Civil Air Patrol of Wisconsin,
an auxiliary of the Army Air Forces. On that occasion ____ calling from
Black River Falls, Wisconsin, telephonically advised this office that
an object in the shape of a disc, nineteen inches in diameter had been
found July 10, 1947, by one ____ city electrician on the Jackson County
fairgrounds, near Black River Falls, Wisconsin, about 3:30 p.m. The
disc might be made of a substance such as cardboard covered by a silver
airplane dope material. The contraption has a small wooden tail like a
rudder in the back and inside of the disc is what appears to be an RCA
photo-electric cell or tube. Also inside the disc is a little electric
motor with a shaft running to the center of the disc. At one end of the
shaft is a very small propeller. In ____ opinion that contraption might
possibly have been made by some juvenile. ____ stated that he desired
to return the contraption to Milwaukee and eventually turn it over to
the Army Air Forces, but that the finder, ____ apparently wanted to get
some publicity on his find and wanted it returned to him.

This information was telephonically called to the attention of
Assistant Director D. M. LADD of the Bureau on July 11, 1947.

Subsequently, SAC H. K. JOHNSON telephoned Colonel ____ in charge of
Counter Intelligence, Fifth Army, Chicago AC of S G-2 Headquarters
Fifth Army, East Hyde Park Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, who stated he
would contact ____ of Black River Falls, Wisconsin.

No further investigation was conducted in this matter.

The above constitutes the only two instances in which this office was
contacted concerning flying discs. Unless contrary instructions are
received from the Bureau, this office does not contemplate taking any
further action in connection with the above two cases, but will fully
investigate all future reports concerning flying discs.

JGF/ddc
98-0


    [Stamped: COPIES DESTROYED
              270 NOV 18 1964]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


August 5, 1947

____
____
Omaha, Nebraska

Dear ____

I wish to acknowledge receipt of your letter postmarked July 10, 1947,
together with its enclosure.

Inasmuch as the information which you furnished is of interest to the
War Department I have taken the liberty of furnishing it to that agency
for their consideration.

Sincerely yours,

John Edgar Hoover
Director

WVC:mjp:rb
62-83894


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-8]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : D. M. Ladd                              DATE: August 1, 1947

FROM   : J. P. Coyno

SUBJECT: MRS. ____
         INFORMANT


There is attached hereto a letter received from the captioned
individual postmarked July 12, 1947, concerning "flying saucers."

There is also attached a letter of acknowledgement to ____ ____
together with a letter to the War Department for approval.

It is recommended that the letter to the War Department be forwarded to
the Liaison Section for transmittal to that agency.

Attachments

WVC:mjp


    [Handwritten: handled separately]

    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


F.B.I. TELETYPE

D E C O D E D  C O P Y


WASH FROM SFRAN    S2    8-9-47    2-50 PM    KC

DIRECTOR FBI AND SACS, SEATTLE AND PORTLAND    URGENT


FLYING DISKS, SECURITY MATTER-X. LT. COL. ____ OF G2, SAN FRANCISCO,
ADVISED TODAY HE HAS NO FURTHER INFORMATION AND THAT OUR SEATTLE OFFICE
IS IN POSSESSION OF ALL INFORMATION KNOWN BY HIM AND IS HANDLING THE
MATTER AT TACOMA, WASHINGTON.

KIMBALL

RECEIVED      8-9-47      8:15 PM EDST

SACS SEATTLE AND PORTLAND ADVISED

If the intelligence contained in the above message is to be
disseminated outside the Bureau, it is suggested that it be suitably
paraphrased in order to protect the Bureau's coding systems.


    [Stamped: G.I.R.-9

              RECORDED

              EX-45]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : Director, FBI                           DATE: August 8, 1947

FROM   : SAC, Norfolk

SUBJECT: FLYING DISCS


Re Bureau Bulletin No. 42, dated July 30, 1947, Series 1947, wherein
information is set forth pertaining to flying discs.

There is enclosed with this letter a newspaper clipping from the
"Norfolk Ledger-Dispatch", dated July 9, 1947. The photograph appearing
on this clipping is alleged to represent a flying disc which was
observed by BILLY TURRENTINE, a Norfolk school boy, who was successful
in photographing the object with his small camera.

BILLY was interviewed on August 8, 1947 by Special Agent (A) ____ at
which time BILLY informed that the original negative was given by him
to a Mr. BROWN of the Photo Craftsman Service, who in turn furnished
the negative to the International News Service. BILLY advised that he
has an agreement with Mr. BROWN whereby the latter will share equally
in any profits derived from the use of the negative by commercial firms
or newspapers. As of August 8, 1947 BILLY has not received any
remuneration for the use of this negative.

He informed that he was sitting on the front porch of his apartment
which is located on the third floor at 410 West 14th Street, Norfolk,
Virginia, around noontime on July 8, 1947. He had read numerous
newspaper articles pertaining to flying discs and decided to sit on his
front porch in the hopes of seeing one and attempting to photograph it.
On July 8, 1947 BILLY observed a large, black object moving rapidly
through space proceeding from the southwest to a northeast direction.
He said the black object was followed by two smaller objects which also
proceeded in the same direction. BILLY explained that the objects were
moving at a very fast speed which appeared to him to be much faster
than the speed of an airplane, and further, that the objects appeared
to be extremely high. He said that they were much higher than the
average plane travels in the City of Norfolk and appeared to be above
the clouds, and that a white mist followed each of the three objects.
BILLY was unable to state what the black objects represented, but
admitted that they could have been large balloons. He indicated that he
has observed small, toy balloons flying through the air, but that
definitely these were not the toy type balloons. He said that when he
first observed the objects they were at such a great distance from him
that it was not necessary that he raise his head in order to see them
from his porch on the third floor of the apartment building. He
immediately turned around to obtain his camera and estimated it took
him approximately twenty to thirty seconds, at which time the discs
were almost directly over his apartment and it was necessary that he
stoop and look up almost perpendicular in order to obtain the
photograph, which accounts for the porch railing being shown in the
newspaper clipping. BILLY pointed out that the day on which he took the
picture, the weather was hazy and somewhat cloudy and there was a
slight breeze blowing from the southwest in the general direction of
the northeast, which is the same direction traveled by the black image
which he photographed.

Inasmuch as the Army authorities in the Tidewater Area of Virginia are
cognizant of the above information, no further investigation will be
conducted by this office in this matter.

Enclosure.

TJC:lab
62-182


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              COPIES DESTROYED
              270 NOV 18 1964]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
COMMUNICATIONS SECTION

AUG 4 1947

TELETYPE

WASHINGTON FROM NEWARK      8-4-47      5-36 PM EDST      JFG

DIRECTOR      U R G E N T


FLYING DISC REPORTED AT HACKENSACK, NJ AUGUST THREE, NINETEEN
FORTY-SEVEN, MISC. INFORMATION RECEIVED THAT ____ AGE ____ ____ AGE
TWENTY, ____ HACKENSACK AND ____ ____ FT. DIX, NJ ON LATE AFTERNOON
AUGUST THIRD LAST SIGHTED FROM GROUND OBJECT DESCRIBED AS FLYING DISC.
____ CLAIMED IT WAS TWO HUNDRED ____ YDS, IN AIR, REVOLVING SLOWLY,
MOVING RAPIDLY, AND NEITHER A KITE NOR A BALLOON. ____ TELEPHONED
INFORMATION TO HACKENSACK PD. INQUIRY BEING MADE, BUREAU WILL BE KEPT
ADVISED.

MC KEE

RECORDED 62-83844-49

END ACK PLS
NK R 1


    [Handwritten: Info. brought to the attention of ____ 8/6/47]

    [Stamped: RECORDED

              EX-46]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
COMMUNICATIONS SECTION

AUG 6 1947

TELETYPE

FBI PORTLAND      8-5-47      8-50 PM      HHS

DIRECTOR AND SACS SEATTLE AND SAN FRANCISCO      U R G E N T


FLYING DISCS, SM DASH X. RE TELEPHONE CALL FROM MR. LADD, ONE PM TODAY
REQUESTING TELETYPE SUMMARY CONCERNING NEWSPAPER REPORTS OF RECENT
REPORTED FLYING DISCS IN PORTLAND AREA AND A REPORTED CONFERENCE OF
ARMY OFFICIALS IN PORTLAND CONCERNING FLYING DISCS.____ ____ THE
OREGONIAN, ADVISED THAT A CAPTAIN WILLIAM L. DAVIDSON AND LT. FRANK M.
BROWN OF FOURTH AAF HEADQUARTERS SAN FRANCISCO WERE IN PORTLAND JULY
TWENTY SEVEN LAST AND INTERVIEWED ____ AN EXPERIENCED PILOT, WHO HAD
REPORTED JUNE FOURTEEN LAST SEEING A FORMATION OF TEN FLYING DISCS OVER
BAKERSFIELD, CALIF. ACCORDING TO ____ THEY HAD ALSO INTERVIEWED
FOLLOWING FOUR EXPERIENCED PILOTS WHO WERE AMONG FIRST WHO REPORTED
SEEING DISCS--____ TO ASCERTAIN THE PURPOSE OF THE INTERVIEWS ____
CONTACTED MAJOR GENERAL TWINING OF WRIGHT FIELD, OHIO BY PHONE AT
ALBUQUERQUE, NM, AND FROM HIM GAINED THE IMPRESSION THAT THE AAF
INSTITUTED THIS INVESTIGATION TO WASH OUT THE DISC REPORTS, SINCE THEY
ARE DEFINITELY NOT OF AAF ORIGIN. ON FRIDAY, AUGUST FIRST, THE PLANE IN
WHICH AAF INVESTIGATORS CAPTAIN DAVIDSON AND LT. BROWN WERE RIDING,
CRASHED AT KELSO, WASH. AND BOTH WERE KILLED. THE WRECKAGE WAS SCREENED
BY AAF INTELLIGENCE FROM MCCHORD FIELD. THE TACOMA NEWS TRIBUNE AND
THROUGH THEM THE UNITED PRESS PUT OUT A STORY THE PLANE WAS CARRYING
PARTS OF A DISC WHICH HAD STRUCK A BOAT OWNED BY HAROLD DAHL AND FRED
CRISMAN, TACOMA, WN. ____ ADVISED THAT TODAY'S ISSUE OF THE OREGONIAN
CARRIES A UP STORY STATING THAT DAHL DENIES SAYING THE METAL FRAGMENTS
HE FURNISHED WERE FROM A DISC, AND ANALYSIS OF THE FRAGMENTS SHOWS THEM
TO BE FROM A TACOMA SLAG MILL. NO AAF INTELLIGENCE PERSONNEL AVAILABLE
PORTLAND. NO RECENT SUBSTANTIVE REPORTS OF FLYING DISCS IN THE PORTLAND
AREA. SEATTLE VERIFY AT MCCHORD FIELD AND SAN FRANCISCO VERIFY AT AAF
HDQRTS. SF, SUBMITTING TELETYPE SUMMARIES TO THE BUREAU. NO FURTHER
INVESTIGATION PORTLAND.

BOBBITT

END AND ACK
WA 0157AM OK FBI WA DW
SE
 S OK FBI SE KLS
SF OK FBI SF NCW
DVIMSC


    [Handwritten: b7C
                  8/6/47
                  cc Mr. Ladd.]

    [Stamped: 67C

              RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-30]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : D. M. LADD                              DATE: August 6, 1947

FROM   : ____

SUBJECT: FLYING SAUCERS


Special Agent ____ of the Liaison Section contacted Lieutenant Colonel
____, Army Air Forces Intelligence, inquiring about an article which
appeared in the West Coast newspapers recently stating in substance
that an airplane carrying recovered flying saucers crashed in route
from Portland, Oregon, to Los Angeles, California.

____ advised ____ that the only information that has been received by
Headquarters of the Army Air Forces is that a CIC Agent of the 4th Air
Forces Headquarters, Hamilton Field, San Francisco, was killed in an
airplane crash. The Headquarters of the Air Forces have been advised
that he was on a top secret mission. ____ indicated that he was under
the impression that the CIC Agent was either on route to or from an
interview with ____ who is one of the individuals who first saw one of
the flying saucers.

____ stated that the Air Forces have no additional information and will
receive none until the report is received from the 4th Air Forces. ____
suggested that the San Francisco Field Office contact Colonel ____
Headquarters 4th Air Forces, Hamilton Field, San Francisco, who
undoubtedly would be able to furnish the details regarding this matter
which are at this time unknown by the Headquarters of the Air Forces.
____ pointed out to ____, however, that it was his belief that no
flying saucers have been recovered but that it was merely an attempt to
reinterview an individual who previously had reported seeing one of the
flying saucers.

SWR:rnr


    [Stamped: RECORDED

              EX-25]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


Date:      August 5, 1947
                                                     CONFIDENTIAL
To:        Director of Intelligence              BY SPECIAL MESSENGER
           War Department General Staff
           The Pentagon
           Washington 25, D.C.

Attention: Colonel ____

From:      John Edgar Hoover--Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation

Subject:   ____


There are attached hereto copies of a letter received from the
above-captioned individual concerning "flying discs."

____ letter has been acknowledged and he has been advised that copies
of his letter have been furnished to you for your consideration.

Attachment

WVC:mjp:rb


    [Handwritten: declassified
                  2040
                  8/31/87
                  HM]

    [Stamped: RECORDED

              COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 10 P.M.
              AUG 7 1947
              FEDERAK BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


Invoice of Contents from                                       L-26
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
WASHINGTON, D.C.

Date 9-10-47           Case References Flying Saucer
Consigned to ____
             Estill, South Carolina

List of Contents


Powered Soap Stone.


SPECIAL INSTRUCTION [illegible] Room, place date of shipment and
registry number; Shipping Room, above date of this invoice; then return
it to person whose name is checked in column at right. After this
checked name has been initialled, invoice should be placed in
administrative file.


    [Stamped: COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 7 P.M.
              SEP 13 1947
              FEDERAK BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

              REGISTERED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

To: COMMUNICATIONS SECTION.                  AUGUST 7, 1947

Transmit the following message to:           SAC, DETROIT    "URGENT"


UNSUBS, ____ INFORMANTS, FLYING DISC, MISC. REURTEL AUGUST 5 MATERIAL
SHOULD NOT BE FORWARDED TO FBI LABORATORY FOR EXAMINATION BUT SHOULD BE
TURNED OVER TO THE ARMY AIRFORCE INTELLIGENCE.

HOOVER

RGF:mae


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
              COMMUNICATION SECTION
              AUG 7 1947

              TELETYPE

              COPIES DESTROYED
              270 NOV 18 1964]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


Date   : August 1, 1947                     PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL

To     : Director of Intelligence
         War Department General Staff
         The Pentagon
         Washington 25, D.C.

              Attention: ____

From   : John Edgar Hoover, Director--Federal Bureau of Investigation

Subject: ____


There are attached hereto copies of a letter received from the
above-captioned individual concerning "flying saucers."

____ letter has been acknowledged and she has been advised that copies
of her letter have been furnished to you for your consideration.

Attachment

WVC:mjp


    [Handwritten: declassified
                  2040
                  8/31/77
                  HM]

    [Stamped: RECEIVED & INDEXED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : DIRECTOR, FBI                            DATE: July 22, 1947

FROM   : SAC, EL PASO

SUBJECT: ____
         FLYING OBJECTS IN AIR


____ has come to the resident agency at Santa Fe, New Mexico on several
occasions to report that she has received information concerning flying
objects passing through the air. Some of the reports that she has
received concern light objects seen at night which have allegedly been
followed by explosions. She advised that one of such objects was
reported by ____ ____ who works near Canjilon, New Mexico. She claims
that others were seen near Park View and Tierra Amarilla, New Mexico.

____ called attention to clippings from various newspapers concerning
"disc-like" objects seen in New Mexico and other parts of the country.

____ claims to be a student of radio waves and ray forms, and contends
that the above mentioned objects may be missiles similar to those
appearing over Sweden some time ago.

____ has discussed the above with officials of the Atomic Energy
Commission, and has written the Secretary of War and other government
officials concerning her theories. ____ for the A.E.C., has advised
that officials at Los Alamos consider ____ ____ unreliable and possibly
not well balanced mentally. She has mentioned to agents of this office
that she was struck by lightning when a child.

On July 15, ____ came to the Santa Fe resident agency and advised that
she had written to WALTER WINCHELL, promising him a story in connection
with the "flying discs."

The foregoing information is being submitted to the Bureau, inasmuch as
____ has written to several government officials and Mr. WINCHELL.

62-0-3594c
FTM:GH


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : D. M. LADD                                      DATE: 7/24/47

FROM   : E. G. Fitch

SUBJECT: FLYING DISCS


Reference is made to my memorandum to you in the above captioned matter
dated July 10, 1947, indicating that Brigadier General George F.
Schulgen of the Army Air Corps Intelligence had requested that the
Bureau cooperate with the Army Air Corps intelligence in connection
with the above captioned matter. The Director noted on the referenced
memorandum, "I would do it but before agreeing to it we must insist
upon full access to discs recovered. For instance in the La. case the
Army grabbed it and would not let us have it for cursory examination."

This is to advise that Special Agent ____ has recontacted General
Schulgen and advised him in connection with the Director's notation.
General Schulgen indicated to ____ that he desired to assure Mr. Hoover
of complete cooperation in this matter and stated that he would issue
instructions to the field directing that all cooperation be furnished
to the FBI and that all discs recovered be made available for the
examination by the FBI Agents. General Schulgen pointed out to ____
that he will from time to time make the results of the studies of his
scientists available to the Bureau for the assistance of the FBI Field
Offices. General Schulgen indicated to ____ that there has been a
decrease in the reported sightings of the discs which might be because
of the fact that it has lost much of its publicity value. He indicated,
however, that he believed it necessary to follow this matter through to
determine as near as possible if discs were in fact seen and to
determine their origin.

General Schulgen inquired of ____ the method by which the Bureau would
make the information obtained from the Bureau's inquiries, known to the
Air Corps, in the Field as well as at the War Department level. Mr.
____ pointed out to General Schulgen that the best procedure appeared
to be through the regular established channels. It was pointed out to
General Schulgen that the Bureau Field Offices maintain close liaison
with the Intelligence Divisions of the various Armies as well as close
liaison with the Intelligence Division of the War Department. General
Schulgen indicated that he would be satisfied to receive information
through this means.

General Schulgen indicated to ____ that he believed that there was a
possibility that this entire matter might have been started by
subversive individuals for the purpose of creating a mass hysteria. He
suggested that the Bureau keep this in mind in any interviews conducted
regarding reported sightings. General Schulgen stated to ____ that he
would make available to the Bureau all information in the possession of
the Air Corps regarding the sightings which were first reported so that
the Bureau could conduct some investigation regarding these individuals
to ascertain their motives for reporting that they had observed flying
discs. When General Schulgen makes the information available regarding
these individuals, it will be promptly brought to your attention.

SWR:rnr


    [Stamped: Copies Destroyed
              270 nov 18 1964

              50 SEP 30 1947

              RECORDED

              EX-43]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


MEMORANDUM FOR D. M. LADD                                     7/23/47


RECOMMENDATION

There is attached a Bureau Bulletin to the Field for their assistance
in handling this matter.


Attachment


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


July 30, 1947

____
____
Brooklyn 27, New York

Dear ____:

I desire to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated July 14, 1947, and
to express my appreciation to you for bringing this matter to my
attention.

The information set forth in your letter has been carefully reviewed
and is being maintained in this Bureau as a matter of record.

Sincerely yours,

John Edgar Hoover
Director

NOTE: ____ has been a previous correspondent with the Bu file ____. No
record could be located in the Crime Records Section indication that
the correspondent might be a mental case.


    [Stamped: RECORDED

              COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 10 P.M.
              JUL 31 1947
              FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : D. M. LADD                                     DATE: 7/10/47

FROM   : E. G. Fitch

SUBJECT: FLYING DISKS


At request of Brigadier General George F. Schulgen, Chief of the
Requirements Intelligence Branch of Army Air Corps Intelligence,
Special Agent ____ discussed the above captioned matter with him on
July 9, 1947. General Schulgen indicated to ____ that the Air Corps has
taken the attitude that every effort must be undertaken in order to run
down and ascertain whether or not the flying disks are a fact and, if
so, to learn all about them. According to General Schulgen, the Air
Corps Intelligence are utilizing all of their scientists in order to
ascertain whether or not such a phenomenon could in fact occur. He
stated that this research is being conducted with the thought that the
flying objects might be a celestial phenomenon and with the view that
they might be a foreign body mechanically devised and controlled.

General Schulgen also indicated to ____ that all Air Corps
installations have been alerted to run out each reported sighting to
obtain all possible data to assist in this research project. In
passing, General Schulgen stated that an Air Corps pilot who believed
that he saw one of these objects was thoroughly interrogated by General
Schulgen and scientists, as well as a psychologist, and the pilot was
adamant in his claim that he saw a flying disk.

General Schulgen advised ____ that the possibility exists that the
first reported sightings of the so-called flying disks were fallacious
and prompted by individuals seeking personal publicity, or were
reported for political reasons. He stated that if this was so,
subsequent sightings might be the result of a mass hysteria. He pointed
out that the thought exists that the first reported sightings might
have been by individuals of Communist sympathies with the view to
causing hysteria and fear of a secret Russian weapon.

General Schulgen indicated to ____ that he is desirous of having all
the angles covered in this matter. He stated that reports of his
scientists and findings of the various Air Corps installations will be
available in his office. He advised that to complete the picture he
desired the assistance of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in
locating and questioning the individuals who first sighted the
so-called flying disks in order to ascertain whether or not they are
sincere in their statements that they saw these disks, or whether their
statements were prompted by personal desire for publicity or political
reasons. General Schulgen assured ____ that there are no War Department
or Navy Department research projects presently being conducted which
could in any way be tied up with the flying disks. General Schulgen
indicated to ____ that if the Bureau would cooperate with him in this
matter, he would offer all the facilities of his office as to results
obtained in the effort to identify and run down this matter.

____ advised General Schulgen that his request would be made known to
the Bureau and an answer made available to him as soon as possible.

____ also discussed this matter with ____ of ____ ____ indicated that
it was his attitude that inasmuch as it has been established that the
flying disks are not the result of any Army or Navy experiments, the
matter is of interest to the FBI. He stated that he was of the opinion
that the Bureau, if at all possible, should accede to General
Schulgen's request.

SWR:AJB


ADDENDUM

I would recommend that we advise the Army that the Bureau does not
believe it should go into these investigations, it being noted that a
great bulk of those alleged discs reported found have been pranks. It
is not believed that the Bureau would accomplish anything by going into
these investigations.

DML


    [First Handwritten Note: I think we should do this.
                                           7-15

    Second Handwritten Note: I would do it but before agreeing to it we
                             must insist upon full access to discs
                             recovered. For instance in the La. case
                             the Army grabbed it & would not let us
                             have it for cursory examination.
                                           H.]

    [Stamped: RECORDED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
COMMUNICATIONS SECTION

AUG 14 1947

TELETYPE

FBI SEATTLE      8-14-47      5-15 PM  FB
DIRECTOR      ROUTINE
FLYING DISCS SIGHTED BY ____, TACOMA.


WASHINGTON, SM X. REURTEL INSTANT DATE. PLEASE BE ADVISED THAT ____ DID
NOT ADMIT TO ____ THAT HIS STORY WAS A HOAX BUT ONLY STATED THAT IF
QUESTIONED BY AUTHORITIES HE WAS GOING TO SAY IT WAS A HOAX BECAUSE HE
DID NOT WANT ANY FURTHER TROUBLE OVER THE MATTER. COMPLETE REPORT NOW
EN ROUTE TO BUREAU AMSD, WHICH INDICATES PROBABLY ____ MADE THE
ANONYMOUS PHONE CALL IN THE HOPE OF BUILDING UP THEIR STORY THROUGH
PUBLICITY TO A POINT WHERE THEY COULD MAKE A PROFITABLE DEAL WITH
FANTASY MAGAZINE, CHICAGO ILLINOIS. ____ WILL NOT BE REINTERVIEWED
UNLESS ADVISED TO THE CONTRARY BY THE BUREAU.

WILCOX
A AND HOLD PLS
9-16 PM OK FBI WASH DC GAR


    [Stamped: 18 Aug 26 1947.

              RECORDED & INDEXED

              G.I.R.
              EX-67]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


(B) FLYING DISCS--The Bureau, at the request of the Army Air Forces
Intelligence, has agreed to cooperate in the investigation of flying
discs. The Air Forces have confidentially advised that it is possible
to release three or more discs in odd numbers, attached together by a
wire, from an airplane in high altitudes and that these discs would
obtain tremendous speed in their descent and would descend to the earth
in an arc. The Army Air Forces Intelligence has also indicated some
concern that the reported sightings might have been made by subversive
individuals for the purpose of creating a mass hysteria.

_______________________________
7-30-47
BUREAU BULLETIN No. 42
Series 1947

You should investigate each instance which is brought to your attention
of a sighting of a flying disc in order to ascertain whether or not it
is a bona fide sighting, an imaginary one or a prank. You should also
bear in mind that individuals might report seeing flying discs for
various reasons. It is conceivable that an individual might be desirous
of seeking personal publicity, causing hysteria, or playing a prank.

The Bureau should be notified immediately by teletype of all reported
sightings and the results of your inquiries. In instances where the
report appears to have merit, the teletype should be followed by a
letter to the Bureau containing in detail the results of your
inquiries. The Army Air Forces have assured the Bureau complete
cooperating in these matters and in any instances where they fail to
make information available to you or make the recovered discs available
for your examination, it should promptly be brought to the attention of
the Bureau.

Any information you develop in connection with these discs should be
promptly brought to the attention of the Army through your usual
liaison channels.


    [Stamped: RECORDED 78 AUG 4, 1947

              252 AUG 18 1947]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


July 10, 1947

____
____
Darlington, South Carolina

Dear ____

I wish to acknowledge receipt of your Western Union telegram dated July
6, 1947. Your interest in bringing this information to my attention is
greatly appreciated.

Inasmuch as the contents of your telegram appear to be of interest to
the War Department only, I have taken the liberty of turning this
information over to that Department.

Sincerely yours,

John Edgar Hoover
Director

cc--Savannah
    NOTE: The telegram referred to "flying-discs."


    [Stamped: COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 2 P.M.
              JUL 14 1947
              FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

              RECORDED & INDEXED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


July 10, 1947

____
____
San Marcos, Texas

Dear ____

I wish to acknowledge receipt of your Western Union telegram dated July
7, 1947. Your interest in making this information available to me is
greatly appreciated.

Inasmuch as the contents of your telegram appear to be of interest to
the War Department only, I have taken the liberty of making the
information furnished by you available to that Department.

Sincerely yours,

John Edgar Hoover
Director

cc--San Antonio
    NOTE: The telegram referred to "flying discs."


    [Stamped: COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 2 P.M.
              JUL 14 1947
              FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

              RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-64]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


July 23, 1947

____
____
Westport, Connecticut

Dear ____

Your letter dated July 27, 1947, together with enclosures, has been
received and I want to thank you for submitting the letter you
mentioned to me.

Sincerely yours,

John Edgar Hoover
Director

BHI:pib


    [Stamped: COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 2 P.M.
              JUL 23 1947
              FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

              RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-57]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
COMMUNICATIONS SECTION

JUL 18 1947

TELETYPE

WASHINGTON FROM BOSTON 3      18

DIRECTOR


METAL FRAGMENTS OBSERVED AT WEST RINDGE, N.H., JULY SEVEN, FORTY SEVEN,
SECURITY MATTER-X. ____, SECURITY OFFICER, M.I.T., CAMBRIDGE, MASS.,
ADVISED THAT TODAY HE WAS IN CONTACT WITH ONE ____ ____ OF WEST RINDGE,
N.H., A RETIRED ____ OF THE NEW ENGLAND TEL. AND TEL. CO. ____ ADVISED
THAT AT APPROXIMATELY THREE PM ON JULY SEVEN LAST SEVERAL PEOPLE
SITTING ON A PORCH OBSERVED ON THE LAWN OF ____ ROUTE ____ WEST RINDGE,
N.H., LITTLE CUP OF SMOKE, WHICH ON INSPECTION DISCLOSED SMALL BURNED
____ SPOTS ABOUT ONE AND ONE HALF INCHES IN DIAMETER ON THE GREEN LAWN.
ALSO IN THE LONG DRY GRASS ON BOTH SIDES OF ROAD IN A CIRCLE
APPROXIMATELY TWO HUNDRED FEET IN DIAMETER SEVERAL LITTLE BLAZES HAD
STARTED AND THE FIRE ____ DEPT. WAS CALLED. FIRES WERE APPARENTLY
CAUSED BY METALLIC FRAGMENTATION WHICH WERE TURNED OVER TO ____ OF MIT
BY A ____ ____ OF THE TELEPHONE COMPANY. ____ HAS ADVISED ____ THAT
THEIR GENERAL ____ APPEARANCE ARE SIMILAR TO THE LINING OF V DASH TWO
BOMBS, WHICH HE HAD OBSERVED AT NEW MEXICO. ____ PROFESSOR ____ AN
OUTSTANDING METALLURGIST AT MIT, STATED THAT THEY ARE POSSIBLY THE
LINING FROM A JET TURBO PLANE. AT PRESENT TIME HE IS IN PROCESS OF
ANALYZING TWO OF THESE PIECES. THESE SCIENTISTS IN ROUGHLY
RECONSTRUCTING THE METALLIC OBJECT STATE IT WAS APPROXIMATELY FOURTEEN
INCHES IN DIAMETER, THREE SIXTEENTH OF AN INCH THICK, AND MACHINE
TOOLED, AND SOME FRAGMENTS INDICATED THEY WERE BURNED AND ____ APPEARED
TO HAVE BEEN SUBJECTED TO TERRIFIC HEAT. THESE SCIENTISTS ARE TREATING
THIS MATTER AS CLASSIFIED INFORMATION. MR. ____ ____ AT WEST RINDGE,
N.H. IS ALSO ENDEAVORING TO COLLECT ADDITIONAL FRAGMENTS AND HAS STATED
THAT THE FIRE CHIEF AT WEST RINDGE HAS ALSO SEVERAL FRAGMENTS IN HIS
POSSESSION. ____ INDICATED THAT THE ____ RESIDENCE IS SEVEN TO EIGHT
HUNDRED FEET EAST OF THE RAILROAD TRACKS. ____STATED HE WILL MAKE THE
RESULTS OF MIT RESEARCH AVAILABLE IF SIGNIFICANT. OPINIONS OF
SCIENTISTS AS SET FORTH ABOVE SUGGEST POSSIBLE MILITARY INTEREST.
MILITARY AUTHORITIES AT BOSTON HAVE NOT BEEN NOTIFIED.

SOUCY

HOLD


    [Stamped: COPIES DESTROYED
              270 NOV 18 1964

              RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-64]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : DIRECTOR, FBI                            DATE: July 18, 1947

FROM   : SAC, NEW HAVEN

SUBJECT: "FLYING SAUCERS"
          EDWIN M. BAILEY, JR.
          STAMFORD, CONNECTICUT, INFORMANT
          ATOMIC ENERGY ACT


For the information of the Bureau this is to advise that on July 7,
1947, ____ Stamford, Connecticut, appeared at the Stamford Resident
Agent's office and furnished the following information:--

____ prefaced his remarks by stating that he is a scientist by
occupation and is currently employed at the American Cyanamid Research
Laboratories on West Main Street in Stamford, Connecticut, in the
Physics Division. ____ further indicated that during the war he was
employed at MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, in the Radiation Laboratory
which Laboratory is connected with the Manhattan Project. ____ advised
that he is thirty years of age and is a graduate of the University of
Arizona.

____ stated that the topic of "flying saucers" had caused considerable
comment and concern to the present day scientists and indicated that he
himself had a personal theory concerning the "flying saucers". Prior to
advancing his own theory, ____remarked that immediately after the
conclusion of World War II, a friend of his, ____ allegedly observed
the "flying saucers" from an observatory in Milan and Bologna, Italy.
He stated that apparently at that time the "flying saucers" had caused
a little comment in Italy but that after some little publicity they
immediately died out as public interest. ____ stated that it is quite
possible that actually the "flying saucers" could be radio controlled
germ bombs or atom bombs which are circling the orbit of the earth and
which could be controlled by radio and directed to land on any
designated target at the specific desire of the agency or country
operating the bombs. He stated that one of the items of interest which
he personally has observed is the fact that the saucers have been
observed in Mexico City, New Orleans, Philadelphia, New York, Boston,
Halifax, Newfoundland, Paris, Milan, Bologna and Yugoslavia as well as
Albania. By placing a string around the globe of the earth it would be
noticed that all of the above-mentioned cities form a direct orbit or
circle around the earth and would be more or less in line of any path
in which the saucers could be circling.

____ further stated that he had recently talked with ____ ____, one of
the owners of ____ in Glenbrook, Connecticut, and had been informed by
____ that his company is making a large powerful telescope to be used
in searching the stratosphere for atom bombs.

FXM/clb
117-0


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-36

              G.I.R.-6

              COPIES DESTROYED
              270 NOV 18 1964]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : Director, FBI                             DATE: July 3, 1947

FROM   : SAC, Butte

SUBJECT: FLYING DISCS


Mr. ____ of the Idaho Daily Statesman, Boise, Idaho, telephonically
contacted the Butte Office and asked if the FBI was checking on the
flying discs reported to have been seen by many citizens. He advised
that so many had reported having seen them that it undoubtedly was not
a figment of the imagination. He said that these discs had been seen on
July 1, 1947, in the vicinity of Trail Creek near Sun Valley, Idaho, by
reputable citizens.

The writer informed ____ that this office was not making an
investigation and inquired as to whether he had contacted Army and Navy
officials. He said that he was inquiring of these agencies.

WGB:LB

AIR MAIL


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-46]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : Director, FBI                            DATE: July 17, 1947

FROM : SAC, Los Angeles

SUBJECT: RECOVERY OF "FLYING DISC"
         NORTH HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA,
         JULY 9, 1947


On the evening of July 9, 1947, a report was received at the Los
Angeles Office that a so-called "flying disc" had landed in the
vicinity of Radford and Magnolia Streets in North Hollywood,
California, the contraption being briefly described as approximately 30
inches in diameter, all metal, disc shaped, and having a radio antenna.
It was reported to have burst into flames upon landing. At the time of
the report the disc was being held at the Valley Fire Department in Van
Nuys, California.

SA ____ went to the fire department immediately at which time it was
found that a number of people had gathered including newspaper
reporters and photographers who were taking pictures of the disc.
Battalion Fire Chief ____ advised Agent that at approximately 10:30
P.M. an unknown woman called on the telephone and excitedly reported
that the disc had dropped into her garden where it began to flame, her
residence being located at 11858 Magnolia Boulevard, North Hollywood. A
fire department truck was sent there and put out the flaming object
with the fire hose, after which the object was taken to the fire
station. SA ____ thereafter arranged to transport the disc to the
office.

The device is briefly described as consisting of two convex steel discs
approximately 2 feet in diameter, fused together at the outer edge and
fastened together in the center by a hollow cylindrical connection. A
vertical galvanized iron fin was screwed to the top of the disc, and a
short length of pipe closed at one and ran from the outer circumference
into the interior of the contraption. What appeared to be a radio tube
was installed in the center of the top side. The contraption had a
total weight of approximately 20 pounds.

At the Bureau Office a series of photographs were taken of the device
from various positions, and a set of these photographs are being
forwarded herewith for the Bureau's inspection and information.

The "flying disc" was thereafter turned over to Major ____ ____ A.C.,
G-2, Fort MacArthur, San Pedro, California, who subsequently reported
that the object was definitely a hoax and under no circumstances could
have flown under its own power.


    [Stamped: RECORDED & INDEXED

              EX-64

              COPIES DESTROYED
              270 NOV 18 1964]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


Director, FBI                                           July 17, 1947

Re: RECOVERY OF "FLYING DISC",
    NORTH HOLLYWOOD, CALIFORNIA,
    JULY 9. 1947


On the following day, July 10, 1947, one ____ ____ North Hollywood,
reported that on this morning he was at the North Hollywood Service
Station eating at which time there was considerable talk about the
flying disc having been found in the vicinity. A number of what
appeared to be young high school students were present and were having
quite a laugh about the excitement caused by the finding of the disc.
____ stated that he received a definite impression that these young
students either had themselves or knew of someone who had been working
for the past two weeks making this "flying disc". ____ was unable to
furnish the names of any of these young men but identified one of them
who was making the statements as being employed in a Chevron Service
Station at the corner of Victory Boulevard and Whitsett Street. He
described the youngster as about sixteen years of age.

The above information was also furnished to the G-2 Office at San
Pedro, California.

MMB:MGM
100-9099
ENC. (3)


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


STANDARD FORM NO. 64

_Office Memorandum_  .  UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT


TO     : MR. LADD                                 DATE: July 10, 1947

FROM   : ____

SUBJECT: FLYING SAUCERS (DISCS)
         INFORMATION CONCERNING


At 6.45 AM this date, SAC Hood telephonically contacted the Bureau and
advised at approximately 11:30 PM, July 9, 1947, the office in Los
Angeles had received information from the Resident Agent at Burbank,
California, that a "flying disc" had landed in or near Burbank and had
been seen to burst into flame when it landed. Further, that it had been
the cause of a fire in some woods, this fire either in Burbank or
possibly in the city limits of Los Angeles, which Mr. Hood could not be
certain. The fire chief at Burbank had called the resident agent at
Burbank and told him he would hold the disc for him.

Coincident with the information received from Burbank, the Los Angeles
Office received calls from the newspapers requesting information. The
newspapers stating they had called the Army Air Force Intelligence who
had stated "we are not interested". According to Mr. Hood, this comment
had aroused the newspapers and they stated they intended to publish
this quotation and belabor same in their first issues, Mr. Hood stated
that he had refrained from making any statement to the press other than
to admit possession of an object and that it was being turned over to
military authorities in the morning (this AM), it being Mr. Hood's
opinion that he did not want any quotes in the press and certainly not
one to the effect that we were not interested.

As described to him, Mr. Hood stated that the object was an aluminum
disc about 2' in diameter weighing about ten pounds, painted with
aluminum paint and having some sort of a radio tube in the center of
the disc. This object was in possession of the resident agent at
Burbank and would be turned over to military authorities (G-2) in Los
Angeles this morning.

Mr. Hood's purpose in calling was to place the Bureau on notice
regarding the above described object and any further information would
be transmitted to the Bureau at once.

Action: None indicated.

PEW:da


    [Stamped: RECORDED]


          *      *      *      *      *      *      *      *


July 18, 1947

____
____
Chicago, Illinois

Dear ____

I wish to acknowledge receipt of your letter postmarked July 7, 1947.
The information contained therein has been carefully reviewed and is
being made a matter of permanent record in the files of this Bureau.
Your interest in writing as you did is indeed appreciated.

In the future should you have information which you feel might be of
interest to this Bureau you might find it convenient to contact the
Special Agent in Charge of our Chicago Office, which is located at 1900
Bankers' Building, Chicago 3, Illinois.

Sincerely yours,

John Edgar Hoover
Director

cc--Chicago (With incoming. There is no identifiable information in
             the Bureau's files concerning the writer of this letter.
             Despite the fact that this letter refers to "flying
             discs", it is not believed that the information furnished
             is sufficiently important to refer to Army authorities.)

WVC:WMJ


    [Stamped: COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
              MAILED 10 P.M.
              JUL 18 1947
              FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
              U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Federal Bureau of Investigation FOIA
Documents - Unidentified Flying Objects, by United States Federal Bureau of Investigation

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOIA DOCUMENTS - UFOS ***

***** This file should be named 25706.txt or 25706.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/0/25706/

Produced by Robin Monks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
